For this project I examine a data set of football plays from 2008 to 2015. This data set contained over 250 columns to start out with. The question I decided to investigate if I could predict the success of fourth down plays. I framed the problem as a classification problem determining whether a fourth down play resulted in a success with the team getting a first down or failing to go the required distance and turning over the ball. For this problem I initially started with logistic regression models for run and pass plays separately. This gave me a based line for the possibility of predicting the results. Next I used Generalized additive models GAMs to identify the tipping point where the distance from the first down line would neither positively nor negatively effect the outcome. After this I used a random forest model to see if it would perform better than the logistic regression. The model was able to improve accuracy, balanced accuracy and kappa scores. I then decided to optimize the model with ranger package and performed a grid search to determine the best hyper parameters. It achieved approximately a 74% accuracy identifying failures and an 77% accuracy determining successes. The kappa score of .52 represent a moderate agreement between the predictions and the actual outcomes. If I had more time I would have like to improve this further. Yards to go(ydstogo), net yards on the drive (ydsnet), what yardline the play took place at (yardline_100) and play type whether it was a run or pass play were important in determining the outcomes. In a practical application coaches understanding the statistical likely hood of a pass or run play based on yards to go could provide them with critical information that could lead to winning a game. An area to improve upon would be the handling of missing data because certain variables had very little data to go off of. Adding more context could be helpful such as what type of defense the opposing defense is running and proficiency of players on the team. For example if the team has a great running back and offensive line this could shift the probability. For example the eagles were renowned for their offensive lines ability to convert of fourth downs through their “tush push” strategy. If you don’t believe me search this up its quite interesting. Overall I used logistic regression, GAMs, and random forest models to effectively predict fourth-down success. This analysis provides a foundation for my research into the statistical side of football.
